We did an award from the concrete society.
Well, it's reconstituted stone.
I like that.
This is quite magnificent.
I just really love how you didn't attempt to replicate a 17th century room.
Well, it's all down to the architecture.
It works perfectly, it does.
They did listen to us about most things.
There were a couple of things that we...
We were overruled on.
The design of the actual rooms is all left to them.
What would you estimate the dimensions of this room?
No, I can't estimate.
I can give you the... But I'm thankful for estimating anything.
Well, I know the... Let me see.
Are they 9 foot wide or 9 foot high?
They're about 9 high easily.
I'd say about 25 feet that way and I'd say about 20.
33 feet across there.
33, okay.
Probably like 50, that would be my guess.
I'd be quite a guess.
You can spot the ones with the paper, like that one, because it's obviously so much whiter.
So there are one or two paper ones.
Obviously there are many of the manuscripts in the 17th century.
We've managed to get a couple of the chart lists done in the same style by the same and they're all accurately based on the old catalogues, but obviously all left to go.
But we have only one, early on surviving, even so it's no earlier than 18th century.
But it's gotten to be in too decrepit a state to... Excuse me one moment.
Can I just...
escape with that book.
So, this is my meaning.
I've got to edit these things and get them done and I'm not getting through the fastness.
So we've only got the two break at the moment with the reputations list, but obviously they would all have had them.
And the letters, as I said, are just 18th century.
Before that, they were numbered.
There were a couple of
Labels like that, that is sexta, meaning six.
Count it from the top, one, two, three, four, five, six.
And the top is secunda, meaning, that was the earliest way, the 17th century way of identifying the shelves.
So they were number one, two, three, four, five, six, et cetera.
on the north side and the same on the south side.
In the 18th century they replaced that with letters.
And the labels above, I think these ones are probably eighties too, but they're certainly based on the earlier ones, getting the actual subject.
What is that little symbol, that little design between the... Just the decoration.
It's one side of the Bay and the other, you see, so it's civil and civil history on that side and scholasticism.
That's wonderful.
I know you're visiting, so actually, if we could just look a little bit.
Fine.
I thought I'd probably do that.
Let's come back, too, because you can do all your things.
Sure.
That's wonderful.
Thank you.
What's your name, sir?
Yes, sir?
Doug Cox.
I'm only a volunteer.
I thought you'd be interested, because if you look at them, that in every language, Hebrew, Latin, Arabic, Welsh, that's Spanish, Greek, Latin, English...
Hebrew.
And these are very early.
And these are printed books, right?
These are printed books, round about the 1500s, 15-1600s.
But, I mean, that one is interesting because that was the first translation into Welsh.
So that's on shelf three, at number four.
It's the...
On the top shelf there, on the left, and it supports the red front.
I see, yes, all right.
And that's 1567, that is the first translation.
And which press is this?
How do we identify this?
This is A. Press A. Press A. Shelf 3.
Shelf 3.
Book number 4.
In that room, that's not in the book.
Arabic 3.
In book 4, Roman numeral.
That's right.
And that is, and just to identify it once again.
The first Welsh New Testament.
First translation into the Welsh language of the New Testament.
And the date on it?
1567.
Little things like that.
This has a little bit of interest.
Wonderful.
Who's that statue?
That little bust up right there, I wonder.
That is the...
James Thomas The interesting part is that the
actual um bust is by uh rubillac oh really okay so that's uh oh that's the white cliff bible that's a very famous bible well now that one is handwritten that's a that's an uh 15th century manuscript yes so that is all handwritten well the site of the bible because of course when you use
The word sorry implies strong drink.
Whatever strong drink is used, this one uses silence.
Yes, yes.
So, of course, it's most appropriate to hear it.
The first complete translation of the Bible into English composed by the followers of the church.
We followed John Rockworth in the late 14th century.
The word cider, spelled cider, S-I-D-I-R, is used in Luke 1.15.
to translate strong and great.
That's right.
Which is much supposed to say, Harry Potter.
And this is the only medieval manuscript in English in the library.
That's very important.
And that's what we can lay on that, given by Robert.
Did you see the Whitecloth Bible thing?
This gentleman is a volunteer.
He's very knowledgeable.
I learn a lot from people like yourself who come around.
This is the only English manuscript in English in the library, and it's called the Cider Bible, because instead of using strong drink, they use cider.
This would probably be done, you see, by...
from a bookseller who would have a team of scribes who would do, and you can see the batches.
You see, each one would probably do a batch of those, of these, you see.
And copy them there.
But the white book Bible is very famous.
It's the first translation of the Bible into English.
It makes it very important.
I'm taking a train back to London this afternoon.